Doc rewrite update 3 - Serialize built in types (#3082)
Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization: docs-website/topics/serialization-serialize-builtin-types.md

leading to precision loss.

Kotlin/JS handles these large `Long` numbers correctly, but JavaScript's native methods don't.
A common workaround is to represent long numbers with full precision using the JSON string type.
Kotlin Serialization supports this approach with [`LongAsStringSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.builtins/-long-as-string-serializer/).
To apply it to a `Long` property, use the `@Serializable` annotation:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.builtins.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
class Data(
    @Serializable(with=LongAsStringSerializer::class)
    val signature: Long
)

fun main() {
    val data = Data(0x1CAFE2FEED0BABE0)
    println(Json.encodeToString(data))
    // {"signature":"2067120338512882656"}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> You can also specify serializers like `LongAsStringSerializer` for all properties in a file.
> For more information, see [Specify serializers for a file](third-party-classes.md#specify-serializers-for-a-file).
>
{style="tip"}

> 

Reviewer: Stating that unsigned is only unsigned in Json is inaccurate, other formats support unsigned directly (and at full range) - maybe something that the protobuf serializer can be extended to do.

    println(Json.encodeToString(data))
    // {"name":"kotlinx.serialization","status":"SUPPORTED"}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> On Kotlin/JS and Kotlin/Native, you must use the `@Serializable` annotation for an `enum` class to use as a root object,
> such as in `encodeToString<Status>(Status.SUPPORTED)`.
>
{style="note"}

#### Customize serial names of enum entries

> For more information on customizing serial names, see [Customize serial names](serialization-customization-options.md#customize-serial-names).
>
{style="tip"}

To customize the serial names of enum entries, use the `@SerialName` annotation and mark the enum class with `@Serializable`:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
// Requires the @Serializable annotation because of @SerialName
@Serializable
enum class Status { @SerialName("maintained") SUPPORTED }

@Serializable
class Project(val name: String, val status: Status) 

fun main() {
    val data = Project("kotlinx.serialization", Status.SUPPORTED)
    println(Json.encodeToString(data))
    // {"name":"kotlinx.serialization","status":"maintained"}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> ## Composite types

Author: Sounds good to me as well — let's drop the term then 👍

Kotlin Serialization supports several composite types from the standard library, but some classes,

> such as ranges and the [`Regex`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/-regex/) class aren't supported yet.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't say "yet" because we do not have any plans to add the support for them. Maybe saying "but not all, such as ranges and Regex" is sufficient.

### Pair and triple

You can serialize the [`Pair`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/-pair/) and [`Triple`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/-triple/) classes from the Kotlin standard library:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
class Project(val name: String)

fun main() {
    val pair = 1 to Project("kotlinx.serialization")
    println(Json.encodeToString(pair))
    // {"first":1,"second":{"name":"kotlinx.serialization"}}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

### Collections

> Kotlin Serialization supports collection types such as [`List`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-list/), [`Set`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-set/), and [`Map`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-map/).

Reviewer 2: I would rephrase this slightly. The thing is, we also support concrete implementations (e.g. `ArrayList` and `LinkedHashSet`), so our users should not have impression that only basic intrefaces are supported. Mutable counterparts should be mentioned as well.

And btw, regular `Array`s and primitive `Int/Long/...Array` too.

> Lists and sets are serialized as JSON arrays, and maps are represented as JSON objects.

Reviewer 2: +1

> Lists and sets are serialized as JSON arrays, and maps are represented as JSON objects.

Author: very nice point thank you!  - added this clarification. (I omitted the "for example" part - and just wrote "In JSON, lists and sets are serialized as....

#### Serialize lists

Kotlin Serialization serializes [`List`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-list/) types as JSON arrays.
Here’s an example with a list of classes:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
class Project(val name: String)

fun main() {
    val list = listOf(
        Project("kotlinx.serialization"),
        Project("kotlinx.coroutines")    
    )
    println(Json.encodeToString(list))
    // [{"name":"kotlinx.serialization"},{"name":"kotlinx.coroutines"}]
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

#### Serialize sets

[`Set`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-set/) types are serialized as JSON arrays, just like [`List` types](#serialize-lists):

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
class Project(val name: String)

fun main() {
    val set = setOf(
        Project("kotlinx.serialization"),
        Project("kotlinx.coroutines")    
    )
    println(Json.encodeToString(set))
    // [{"name":"kotlinx.serialization"},{"name":"kotlinx.coroutines"}]
}
//sampleEnd

> ```

Reviewer 2: Since Sets have their own section, maybe it is worth mentioning that

> Duplicate entries in Sets do not cause exceptions on deserialization by default and behavior on duplicates is implementation-defined.

{kotlin-runnable="true"}

#### Serialize maps

Kotlin serialization supports [`Map`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-map/) types with primitive or enum keys:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
class Project(val name: String)

fun main() {
    // Creates a map with Int keys
    val map = mapOf(
        1 to Project("kotlinx.serialization"),
        2 to Project("kotlinx.coroutines")    
    )
    println(Json.encodeToString(map))
    // {"1":{"name":"kotlinx.serialization"},"2":{"name":"kotlinx.coroutines"}}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

In JSON, maps are represented as objects. Since JSON object keys are always strings, keys are encoded as strings even if they are numbers in Kotlin.

> JSON doesn't natively support complex or composite keys.

> > To encode structured objects as map keys, see [Encode structured map keys](serialization-json-configuration.md#encode-structured-map-keys).

Reviewer 2: You can also add 
> Other formats may represent Maps with object keys in a more natural ways.

>

> {style="note"}

Author: the focus is on JSON here — unless we specify how it differs I think it might be just stating the obvious here. (to me it would read like: In JSON it works like this. In other formats it might work differently.) But if we have a very critical difference here, then I think we could list it.

#### Deserialization behavior of collections

> Kotlin uses the declared type to deserialize JSON.

Reviewer 2: I think original 
> During deserialization, the type of the resulting object is determined by the static type that was specified in the source code—either as the type of the property or as the type parameter of the decoding function.

explains what happens better. It also answers the question "What happens if I specify ArrayList or LinkedList"

Reviewer 2: Although you can mention this in the beginning of the section, add the suggested tip to the Set section and drop this section completely.

    println(data)
    // Data(a=[42, 42], b=[42])
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> For more information about collections in Kotlin, see [Collections overview](collections-overview.md).
>
{style="tip"}

## Unit and singleton objects

The Kotlin [`Unit`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/-unit/) type and other singleton objects are serializable.
A [singleton](object-declarations.md) is a class with only one instance, where the state is defined by the object itself rather than by external properties.
In JSON, singleton objects are serialized as empty structures:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
object SerializationVersion {
    val libraryVersion: String = "1.0.0"
}

fun main() {
    println(Json.encodeToString(SerializationVersion))
    // {}
    println(Json.encodeToString(Unit))
    // {}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> You can use serialized singleton objects in [closed polymorphic hierarchies](serialization-polymorphism.md#serialize-objects-in-sealed-hierarchies)
> to represent cases without additional fields.
>
{style="tip"}

> ## Duration

Reviewer 2: We also have two new serializers for `Instant` btw (https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization/pull/2945). They probably should be mentioned here (and requirement for Kotlin 2.2)

Author: nice one 💯 I added it to this section, so now it should be 

### Duration and Instant

(added `kotlin-min-compiler-version="2.2"` to the example as well)

> Kotlin's [`Duration`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.time/-duration/) class is serialized to a JSON string using the ISO-8601-2 format:

Reviewer 2: Yes, maybe just say "string" instead of "JSON string"?

}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

### Numbers

You can serialize all Kotlin number types, including integers and floating-point numbers, using their natural JSON representations:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*
import kotlin.math.PI

//sampleStart
@Serializable
class Data(
    val answer: Int,
    val pi: Double
)                     

fun main() {
    val data = Data(42, PI)
    println(Json.encodeToString(data))
    // {"answer":42,"pi":3.141592653589793}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

### Unsigned numbers

Kotlin Serialization supports Kotlin's [unsigned integer types](unsigned-integer-types.md) like `UByte` and `UInt`.
In JSON, these values are serialized as regular JSON numbers and preserve their full unsigned range:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
class Counter(val counted: UByte, val description: String)

fun main() {
    val counted = 239.toUByte()
    println(Json.encodeToString(Counter(counted, "tries")))
    // {"counted":239,"description":"tries"}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> > Unsigned numbers are currently only supported in the JSON format.

Reviewer 2: 'Supported' is not the best choice of words here IMO. They're working in other formats as well, just have different default representation. I would say
"Unsigned numbers have special handling to be represented this way in the JSON format. Other formats may or may not have this special representation. For example, ProtoBuf and CBOR serialize these types using their signed counterparts."

enum class Status { @SerialName("maintained") SUPPORTED }

@Serializable
class Project(val name: String, val status: Status) 

fun main() {
    val data = Project("kotlinx.serialization", Status.SUPPORTED)
    println(Json.encodeToString(data))
    // {"name":"kotlinx.serialization","status":"maintained"}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

## Standard library types

Kotlin Serialization supports several types from the standard library, but some classes,
such as ranges and the [`Regex`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/-regex/) class, aren't supported.

### Pair and triple

You can serialize the [`Pair`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/-pair/) and [`Triple`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/-triple/) classes from the Kotlin standard library:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
class Project(val name: String)

fun main() {
    val pair = 1 to Project("kotlinx.serialization")
    println(Json.encodeToString(pair))
    // {"first":1,"second":{"name":"kotlinx.serialization"}}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

### Collections

> Kotlin Serialization supports collection types, including both immutable and mutable variants of [`List`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-list/), [`Set`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-set/), and [`Map`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-map/).

Reviewer 2: `List` and so are not immutable, they're *read-only*, it is a different term with a different meaning. We use it across our documentation (https://kotlinlang.org/docs/collections-overview.html#collection-types), please pay attention, as it may confuse users.

Kotlin Serialization serializes [`List`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-list/) types as JSON arrays.
Here’s an example with a list of classes:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
class Project(val name: String)

fun main() {
    val list = listOf(
        Project("kotlinx.serialization"),
        Project("kotlinx.coroutines")    
    )
    println(Json.encodeToString(list))
    // [{"name":"kotlinx.serialization"},{"name":"kotlinx.coroutines"}]
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

#### Serialize sets

[`Set`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-set/) types are serialized as JSON arrays, just like [`List` types](#serialize-lists):

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
class Project(val name: String)

fun main() {
    val set = setOf(
        Project("kotlinx.serialization"),
        Project("kotlinx.coroutines")    
    )
    println(Json.encodeToString(set))
    // [{"name":"kotlinx.serialization"},{"name":"kotlinx.coroutines"}]
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> > By default, you can deserialize sets with duplicate entries. The behavior for handling duplicates depends on the specific `Set` implementation.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't say it depends on `Set` implementation, but rather on Set deserializer and the rest of kotlinx.serialization framework. I believe saying 'implementation-defined' is enough, it should be common and familiar term.

    // {"1":{"name":"kotlinx.serialization"},"2":{"name":"kotlinx.coroutines"}}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

In JSON, maps are represented as objects. Since JSON object keys are always strings, keys are encoded as strings even if they are numbers in Kotlin.

> JSON doesn't natively support complex or composite keys.
> To encode structured objects as map keys, see [Encode structured map keys](serialization-json-configuration.md#encode-structured-map-keys).
>
{style="note"}

#### Deserialization behavior of collections

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
data class Data(
    val a: List<Int>,
    val b: Set<Int>
)

fun main() {
    val data = Json.decodeFromString<Data>("""
        {
            "a": [42, 42],
            "b": [42, 42]
        }
    """)
    // Duplicates are removed from data.b because Set enforces unique elements
    println(data)
    // Data(a=[42, 42], b=[42])
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> For more information about collections in Kotlin, see [Collections overview](collections-overview.md).
>
{style="tip"}

### Unit and singleton objects

> The Kotlin [`Unit`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/-unit/) type and other singleton objects are serializable.

Reviewer 2: Kotlin or Kotlin's ?

[//]: # (title: Serialize built-in types)

> The Kotlin serialization library supports various built-in types, including basic types such as primitives and strings, as well as certain standard library classes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Kotlin serialization library supports a variety of built-in types, including basic types such as primitives and strings, as well as certain standard library classes.
```
This sounds more natural to me but it's up to you :)

Author: sounds better to me as well 👍 let's go with it it

}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> You can also specify serializers like `LongAsStringSerializer` for all properties in a file.
> For more information, see [Specify serializers for a file](third-party-classes.md#specify-serializers-for-a-file).
>
{style="tip"}

### Enum classes

All `enum` classes are serializable by default without the `@Serializable` annotation.
When serialized in JSON, an `enum` is encoded as a string:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
// The @Serializable annotation isn't required for enum classes
enum class Status { SUPPORTED }

@Serializable
class Project(val name: String, val status: Status) 

fun main() {
    val data = Project("kotlinx.serialization", Status.SUPPORTED)
    println(Json.encodeToString(data))
    // {"name":"kotlinx.serialization","status":"SUPPORTED"}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> On Kotlin/JS and Kotlin/Native, you must use the `@Serializable` annotation for an `enum` class to use as a root object,
> such as in `encodeToString<Status>(Status.SUPPORTED)`.
>
{style="note"}

#### Customize serial names of enum entries

> > For more information on customizing serial names, see [Customize serial names](serialization-customization-options.md#customize-serial-names).

Reviewer 3: I think it makes sense for the content of this tip to be moved to the bottom of the section and then it doesn't need to be  a tip anymore. What do you think?

Author: nice, I like it 👍  — moved it

It also supports their concrete implementations such as [`ArrayList`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/core/kotlin-stdlib/kotlin.collections/-array-list/) and [`LinkedHashSet`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/core/kotlin-stdlib/kotlin.collections/-linked-hash-set/), as well as generic and primitive array types.
The way these collections are represented depends on the serialization format.

In JSON, lists and sets are serialized as JSON arrays, and maps are represented as JSON objects.

Kotlin uses the declared type to deserialize JSON.
During deserialization, the type of the resulting object is determined by the static type specified in the source code.
This type can be either the type of the property or the type parameter of the decoding function.

#### Serialize lists

Kotlin serialization serializes [`List`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-list/) types as JSON arrays.

> Here’s an example with a list of classes:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here's an example with a list of classes:
```

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
class Project(val name: String)

fun main() {
    val list = listOf(
        Project("kotlinx.serialization"),
        Project("kotlinx.coroutines")    
    )
    println(Json.encodeToString(list))
    // [{"name":"kotlinx.serialization"},{"name":"kotlinx.coroutines"}]
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

#### Serialize sets

[`Set`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-set/) types are serialized as JSON arrays, just like [`List` types](#serialize-lists):

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
class Project(val name: String)

fun main() {
    val set = setOf(
        Project("kotlinx.serialization"),
        Project("kotlinx.coroutines")    
    )
    println(Json.encodeToString(set))
    // [{"name":"kotlinx.serialization"},{"name":"kotlinx.coroutines"}]
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> > By default, you can deserialize sets with duplicate entries. The behavior for handling duplicates is implementation-defined.

Author: yes — it could be controlled but very complex - so removed it as it might just confuse people this early

{style="tip"}

#### Serialize maps

Kotlin serialization supports [`Map`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-map/) types with primitive or enum keys:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
class Project(val name: String)

fun main() {
    // Creates a map with Int keys
    val map = mapOf(
        1 to Project("kotlinx.serialization"),
        2 to Project("kotlinx.coroutines")    
    )
    println(Json.encodeToString(map))
    // {"1":{"name":"kotlinx.serialization"},"2":{"name":"kotlinx.coroutines"}}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

Map serialization depends on the format.
In JSON, maps are represented as objects. Since JSON object keys are always strings, keys are encoded as strings even if they are numbers in Kotlin.
Other formats, such as CBOR, support maps with non-primitive keys and preserve them as such.

> JSON doesn't natively support complex or composite keys.
> To encode structured objects as map keys, see [Encode structured map keys](serialization-json-configuration.md#encode-structured-map-keys).
>
{style="note"}

#### Deserialization behavior of collections

> 

Reviewer 3: Missing an intro here :)

In JSON, singleton objects are serialized as empty structures:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
object SerializationVersion {
    val libraryVersion: String = "1.0.0"
}

fun main() {
    println(Json.encodeToString(SerializationVersion))
    // {}
    println(Json.encodeToString(Unit))
    // {}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> You can use serialized singleton objects in [closed polymorphic hierarchies](serialization-polymorphism.md#serialize-objects-in-sealed-hierarchies)
> to represent cases without additional fields.
>
{style="tip"}

### Duration and Instant

Kotlin's [`Duration`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.time/-duration/) type is serialized to a string using the ISO-8601-2 format:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*
import kotlin.time.*

//sampleStart
fun main() {
    val duration = 1000.toDuration(DurationUnit.SECONDS)
    println(Json.encodeToString(duration))
    // "PT16M40S"
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> Starting with Kotlin 2.2.0, you can serialize Kotlin's [`Instant`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/core/kotlin-stdlib/kotlin.time/-instant/) type

Author: As mentioned, this is an exception and it's only documented here as of now — so for now let's keep it in, but we'll monitor it.

import kotlinx.serialization.json.*
import kotlin.time.*

//sampleStart
fun main() {
    val instant = Instant.fromEpochMilliseconds(1607505416124)
    println(Json.encodeToString(instant))
    // "2020-12-09T09:16:56.124Z"
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true" kotlin-min-compiler-version="2.2"}

### Nothing

The [`Nothing`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/-nothing.html) type is serializable by default.
It has no instances, so encoding or decoding it throws an exception.
Use `Nothing` when a type is syntactically required, but not involved in serialization, like in [polymorphic classes with generic base types](serialization-polymorphism.md#serialize-polymorphic-types-with-generic-base-types):

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.builtins.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
sealed class ParametrizedParent<out R> {
    @Serializable
    data class ChildWithoutParameter(val value: Int) : ParametrizedParent<Nothing>()
}

fun main() {
    println(Json.encodeToString(ParametrizedParent.ChildWithoutParameter(42)))
    // {"value":42}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

## What's next

> * Dive into the [Serialize classes](serialization-customization-options.md) section to learn how to serialize classes and how to modify the default behavior of the `@Serializable` annotation.

Reviewer 3: Similar comment to the get started PR about whether this is an actual page or a section within the page.
